---
layout: post
title: "Prepare &amp; Booting"
description: "Prepare the environment and build the bootloader"
category: firefoxos
tags: [firefoxos, andriod, toolchain]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

## Setup and Build bootloaders

Since I want to build the FirefoxOS from scratch, I decided to torn part the FirefoxOS into pieces. The first thing I need to do is to download and setup the basic envrioment.

-  Toolchain
	There are several ways to get the ARM targeted toolchains setup: compile from sources by using crosstools-ng, download one from [Linaro](https://launchpad.net/linaro-toolchain-binaries), or download from Mentor-Graphics(CodeSourcery).

	I use Linaro gcc-4.7 toolchain, which support hardware FPU. I put his tool in `$HOME/x-tools`

- Bootloaders

	The Pandaboard-ES use TI OMAP4460 ARM-SOC, which provides many flexable bootup methods, the most popular one in development is by USB booting and uploading. But in production, we need it booting up from FLASH or SD/MMC installed. I will basicly follow the SD/MMC way.

	1. TI X-Loader
		x-loader is the first stage bootloader, which is loaded into SOC internal SRAM by its ROM booting code.
        so it's small enough to be loaded.

		Clone the source from: [git.omapzoom.org](git://git.omapzoom.org/repo/x-loader.git)

			$ git clone git://git.omapzoom.org/repo/x-loader.git
			$ git checkout origin/omap4_dev

		> ### Note
		>  the original xloader can't be compiled because of some errors:
		>
		>  - `smc #0` in `cpu/omap4/rom_public_dispatcher.S` can't be recognized.
		>     this could be resolved by adding `.arch_extension sec` before `.global omap_smc_rom`
		>
		>			diff --git a/cpu/omap4/rom_public_dispatcher.S b/cpu/omap4/rom_public_dispatcher.S
		>			index 36d9591..95df7c7 100644
		>			--- a/cpu/omap4/rom_public_dispatcher.S
		>			+++ b/cpu/omap4/rom_public_dispatcher.S
		>			@@ -28,6 +28,8 @@
		>			  * @rom_svc: Application ID of ROM api (input in r0 will move to r12)
		>			  * @arg: Argument passed to ROM api (input in r1 will move to r0)
		>			  */
		>			+.arch_extension sec
		>			+
		>			.globl omap_smc_rom
		>			omap_smc_rom:
		>			push {r4-r11,lr}
		>
		>
		>  - thumb-interworking is not enabled in default
		> 	  Linaro gcc-4.7 12.10 in default doesn't enable thumb-interworking, we need to add a compiler option in `cpu/omap4/config.mk`:
		>
		>			diff --git a/cpu/omap4/config.mk b/cpu/omap4/config.mk
		>			index 20972b5..1ad89fd 100644
		>			--- a/cpu/omap4/config.mk
		>			+++ b/cpu/omap4/config.mk
		>			@@ -20,7 +20,7 @@
		>		 	# MA 02111-1307 USA
		>		 	#
		>		 	PLATFORM_RELFLAGS += -fno-strict-aliasing  -fno-common -ffixed-r8 \
		>			-       -msoft-float
		>			+       -msoft-float -mthumb-interwork
		>

		Build the xloader:

			$ cd x-loader
			$ make omap4430panda_config
			$ make CROSS_COMPILE=${XTOOLS_LINARO} ift
			$ cp xloader.bin.ift $(OUT)/MLO

		Here signed xloader is generated. 'signed' here means the CH and GP headers are put ahead of the xloader bin, the final result is `x-loader/x-load.bin.ift`.

	2. u-boot

		Clone the source from: [git.omapzoom.org](git://git.omapzoom.org/repo/u-boot.git):

			$ git clone git://git.omapzoom.org/repo/u-boot.git
			$ git checkout origin/omap4_dev

		Build the u-boot:

			$ cd u-boot
			$ make omap4430panda_config
			$ make CORSS_COMPILE=${XTOOLS_LINARO}
			$ cp u-boot.bin $(OUT)/u-boot.bin

		Up to now, u-boot bin-image is generated.

- Burn bootloaders

	There are many ways to boot up OMAP4460, that depends on how the SYSBOOT pins are configured on board. Pandaboard-ES in defult is configured to boot in sequence of
(USB->MMC1) or (UART->MMC1).

	I like to use MMC1, below is how to burn the bootloaders into MMC1 (SDCARD).

	I use parted to make the [GPT partion](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GUID_Partition_Table) on sdcard.

		$ sudo parted -a min -s /dev/sdc "unit s mkpart xloader 256 511"
		$ sudo parted -a min -s /dev/sdc "unit s mkpart uboot 512 1279"
		$ sudo dd if=$(OUT)/MLO of=/dev/sdc1 bs=512
		$ sudo dd if=$(OUT)/u-boot.bin of=/dev/sdc2 bs=512

	There is no need to create FAT for bootloaders, because OMAP4460 ROM code will search the CH-GP header at sectors: 256/512/768/1280 in MMC.
	xloader will also get the u-boot begining from sector 512 if the FAT is not found.

	Up to now, the sdcard can boot the board and go into 'fastboot' mode in u-boot.
	Next step to build the kernel and let the u-boot bring it up.

	> ### More on u-boot:
	> 1. By checking the u-boot code, actually there is no code specific for Pandaboard-ES, instead, the previous PandaBoard code is reused for the purpose.
	>    There is no big difference between two boards except some trivial details, for example the revision#(5bits vs 3bits), SOC(omap4460 vs omap4430) etc.
	>    So unless the accurate information or some special purpose is needed, looks it's not necessary to specialize the u-boot for Pandaboard-ES.
	> 2. The argument passed to Kernel may need to altered. We will check it later.
	> 3. Currently, Pandaboard u-boot code doesn't enable the HUSH parser, the fastboot cmd is directly run in u-boot main_loop. 
	>    The default command is defined as `#define CONFIG_BOOTCOMMAND "booti mmc0"`, then `do_booti(..)` search for partition named 'boot', if this partition is not found or 
	>	 something wrong with the kernel loading, it will fallback to USB fastboot mode, the fastboot main-loop will be waiting on USB port.
	> 4. The boot-delay is set to be 0, because there is no hush shell



